 
 

 

 

 

AI-Based System Diagnostics & Analysis Platform 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

​​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​ 

​​ 

Chapter6 .................................................................................................................................... 38 

 6.1 Recent Enhancements ....................................................................................................... 38 

 

 

Chapter 1 

Introduction 

1.1 Background 

Efficient system diagnostics and failure analysis are critical components in maintaining reliability, performance, and stability within modern software and operating system environments. In enterprise and production systems, large volumes of logs, crash dumps, and event records are generated continuously. While these artifacts contain valuable diagnostic information, manually interpreting them is often time-consuming, repetitive, and dependent on expert-level knowledge. 

Traditional debugging workflows rely heavily on manual log inspection, keyword searching, and direct interaction with debugging tools such as WinDbg. Although effective in controlled environments, these approaches become inefficient when handling large-scale logs containing thousands of repetitive entries or complex crash dump files requiring symbol resolution and stack trace analysis. Furthermore, conventional rule-based log analyzers lack contextual understanding and struggle to consolidate semantically identical failures into meaningful root-cause patterns. 

With advancements in artificial intelligence and large language models (LLMs), AI-assisted diagnostic systems have emerged as a promising solution for automating complex reasoning tasks. Modern LLMs demonstrate strong capabilities in contextual understanding, pattern recognition, and structured information extraction. However, generic AI models without domain adaptation often produce unstable outputs, inconsistent classifications, or overly generic recommendations when applied directly to production diagnostic scenarios. 

This project focuses on the development of an AI-Based System Diagnostics and Analysis Platform that operates entirely in an offline environment. The system integrates structured log parsing, signature-based error grouping, automated crash dump analysis through Win Dbg, and domain-controlled AI reasoning using a locally deployed LLM (Llama3.1:8B via Ollama). By combining normalization techniques, intelligent grouping strategies, and enterprise-level prompt engineering, the platform transforms raw diagnostic artifacts into structured, actionable insights. 

A key objective of the system is to reduce diagnostic noise by consolidating repetitive failures, accurately identifying root causes, detecting faulty drivers in crash dumps, and generating technically meaningful corrective actions. The platform supports multi-file analysis, cross-file root cause correlation, optional PDB symbol validation, and stable JSON-based structured outputs for consistent frontend rendering. 

The developed system has practical applications in production debugging environments, driver development workflows, system monitoring, and enterprise IT operations. It demonstrates how artificial intelligence can enhance traditional debugging processes, reduce manual effort, and provide scalable, intelligent assistance for complex system-level diagnostics. 

 

1.2 Problem Statement 

Modern software systems and operating environments generate extensive diagnostic artifacts, including application logs, system event records, ETL traces, and crash dump files. While these artifacts contain critical information for identifying faults and performance bottlenecks, manual analysis presents several challenges: 

Large logs often contain thousands of repetitive error entries, making root cause identification difficult. 

Traditional keyword-based log analyzers lack contextual reasoning and produce fragmented outputs. 

Crash dump analysis requires expertise in debugging tools such as WinDbg and proper symbol (PDB) management. 

Diagnostic workflows are time-consuming and heavily dependent on experienced engineers. 

Generic AI models, when applied without domain adaptation, may produce unstable or technically superficial results. 

As system complexity increases, the need for a scalable, automated, and intelligent diagnostic solution becomes essential. Therefore, there is a requirement for an AI-assisted platform capable of consolidating repetitive failures, interpreting crash dumps, and generating structured, technically meaningful root cause insights in a reliable and production-ready manner. 

 

1.3 Objectives 

The primary objective of this project is to design and implement an AI-Based System Diagnostics and Analysis Platform that enhances debugging efficiency and reduces manual analysis effort. 

The specific objectives include: 

To develop a structured log analysis engine capable of filtering, normalizing, and grouping repetitive error patterns. 

To integrate a locally deployed Large Language Model (LLM) for contextual classification of errors, root cause identification, and fix recommendation. 

To automate Windows crash dump analysis using WinDbg and extract critical diagnostic information such as Bug Check codes and faulty drivers. 

To implement signature-based grouping and cross-file correlation for identifying systemic failures. 

To ensure stable and structured JSON-based outputs for consistent frontend rendering. 

 To maintain complete offline functionality without dependency on external cloud services. 

To provide user-friendly features such as multi-file support, Ask-AI interaction, and chatbot-assisted debugging guidance. 
 

1.4 Scope 

The scope of this project includes the development of a diagnostic platform capable of analyzing the following data sources: 

Application and system log files (.txt, .log). 

Structured Windows Event Viewer exports. 

Event Trace Log (.etl) files. 

Windows crash dump (.dmp) files. 

The system performs: 

Error extraction and normalization. 

Signature-based grouping. 

AI-driven classification and remediation suggestions. 

Automated WinDbg execution for crash interpretation. 

Optional PDB symbol validation. 

Cross-file root cause correlation. 

The platform is designed to operate within Windows-based environments and is optimized for offline enterprise deployments. 

The scope does not include real-time kernel-level debugging or distributed cloud-based monitoring systems. Instead, it focuses on post-event diagnostic automation and structured failure interpretation. 

 

 

 

1.5 Methodology 

Phase 1: Initial Log Processing Framework 

The project began with the development of a basic log ingestion system using a Flask-based backend. Users were able to upload log files, and a simple keyword-based detection mechanism identified lines containing terms such as "error", "exception", and "failed". This phase established the foundational file upload and log parsing workflow. 

Phase 2: Structured UI Representation 

To improve usability, the system was enhanced with a structured card-based user interface. Detected errors were displayed as categorized issue cards rather than raw text output. 

This improved readability and provided a clearer visualization of detected failures. 

 

Phase 3: AI Integration and Local Model Deployment 

The system transitioned from rule-based detection to AI-assisted reasoning through integration of a locally deployed Large Language Model (Llama3.1:8B via Ollama). 

The AI engine was used to classify errors, identify probable root causes, assign severity levels, and recommend corrective actions while maintaining complete offline functionality. 

 

Phase 4: Large Log Performance Evaluation 

Testing with real-world logs revealed performance bottlenecks when processing large files containing thousands of entries. 

This phase identified scalability limitations in AI input handling and highlighted the need for input optimization. 

Phase 5: Error-Only Filtering Mechanism 

To improve efficiency, the system was refined to extract only meaningful failure-related lines before AI processing. 

This reduced token usage, improved response time, and minimized unnecessary AI workload. 

 

Phase 6: Normalization and Signature-Based Grouping 

A normalization engine was implemented to remove variable components such as timestamps, numeric identifiers, and memory addresses. 

Signature-based grouping using a composite key (Source + EventID + Root Signature) was introduced to consolidate repetitive failures into unique patterns. 

This marked the shift from line-level analysis to pattern-level intelligence. 

 

Phase 7: Context-Aware AI Analysis 

To enhance classification accuracy, the surrounding log context was provided to the AI engine. 

This improved root cause interpretation and reduced misclassification of isolated error messages. 

 

Phase 8: Active vs Resolved Detection 

The system was enhanced to evaluate post-error log states. If recovery indicators were detected after an error, the issue was marked as resolved; otherwise, it was classified as active. 

This provided clearer operational insight. 

 

Phase 9: AI-First Classification Architecture 

The workflow was restructured into a formal pipeline: 

Normalize → Group → Extract Unique Patterns → AI Classification → Attach Occurrence Count 

This centralized reasoning logic and reduced redundant AI calls. 

 

Phase 10: Crash Dump Analysis Introduction 

The system was extended to support Windows crash dump (.dmp) files. 

This marked the transition from log-only analysis to full system-level diagnostics. 

 

Phase 11: WinDbg Automation Integration 

Microsoft WinDbg was integrated into the backend to automate crash parsing. 

The system executed automated commands to extract Bug Check codes, stack traces, and faulty modules. 

 

Phase 12: Crash Output Filtering Optimization 

To reduce AI input size, only critical sections of crash output (starting from Bug Check) were extracted and filtered. 

This improved processing speed and response stability. 

 

Phase 13: AI-Based Crash Interpretation 

The AI engine was extended to interpret crash dump data. 

It identified Bug Check meanings, faulty drivers, subsystem involvement, and recommended corrective actions. 

Phase 14: Multi-Dump File Support 

The platform was enhanced to support multiple crash dump uploads in a single session. 

Each dump was processed sequentially, and results were displayed individually. 

Phase 15: PDB Symbol Upload Support 

Optional PDB (Program Database) file upload was introduced to enable precise symbol resolution during crash analysis. 

This allowed function-level fault identification when matching symbols were provided. 

Phase 16: Symbol Mismatch Detection 

The system implemented validation logic to detect symbol loading failures or mismatched PDB files. 

Users were notified when symbol inconsistencies were identified. 

 

Phase 17: Execution Stability and Timeout Handling 

Safeguards were introduced to improve reliability, including timeout control for WinDbg execution, safe subprocess management, and improved error handling. 

This ensured stable operation during long-running diagnostic tasks. 

 

Phase 18: Unified Multi-Source Diagnostic Architecture 

A unified architecture was established to support multiple diagnostic sources: 

Log files 

Structured Event Viewer exports 

ETL traces 

Crash dumps 

All sources were processed through a consistent AI-driven classification framework. 

Phase 19: Structured Event Viewer Parser Rewrite 

Exported Event Viewer logs were parsed using structured field extraction (Level, Date, Source, EventID, Message). This improved component-aware grouping and enhanced diagnostic precision. 

 

Phase 20: Root Signature Consolidation 

Semantically identical failures across logs were merged using refined root signature extraction. 

This significantly reduced noise and ensured consistent remediation suggestions. 

 

Phase 21: AI Output Stability Layer 

A defensive JSON extraction and validation layer was implemented to handle malformed or partially structured AI responses. 

This ensured reliable parsing and prevented frontend rendering failures. 

 

Phase 22: Enterprise Prompt Engineering Framework 

The AI prompt structure was redesigned to enforce: 

Subsystem identification 

Failure categorization 

Root cause reasoning 

Actionable remediation 

Reduced "Unknown" classifications 

This enhanced the technical depth and consistency of AI outputs. 

Phase 23: Cross-File Root Cause Intelligence Layer 

A systemic correlation mechanism was introduced to analyze patterns across multiple uploaded files. 

Severity-based and frequency-weighted scoring identified dominant failure signatures, and the AI engine generated consolidated root cause summaries with confidence estimation. 

This phase transformed the system from a file-level analyzer into a multi-source diagnostic intelligence platform. 
  

 

Chapter 2 

System Architecture and Design 

2.1 Overall System Architecture 

The AI-Based System Diagnostics and Analysis Platform is designed as a modular, offline diagnostic framework capable of analyzing logs, structured event data, ETL traces, and crash dump files. 

The system follows a layered architecture consisting of: 

User Interface Layer 

Backend Processing Layer 

AI Classification Engine 

Crash Dump Processing Engine 

Correlation & Intelligence Layer 

Database Layer 

Users interact with the system through a web-based interface built using Flask. Uploaded files are processed through dedicated analysis pipelines depending on file type. The processed diagnostic data is then passed to a locally deployed Large Language Model (Llama3.1:8B via Ollama) for structured classification and root cause reasoning. 

For crash dumps, the system integrates Microsoft Win Dbg to automate extraction of debugging information before AI interpretation. 

All components operate entirely offline, ensuring enterprise compatibility and data privacy. 

 

2.2 System Components 

2.2.1 Frontend Layer 

The frontend is developed using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript and provides an intuitive user interface for diagnostic interaction. 

Key features include: 

Multi-file upload support (.log, .txt, .etl, .dmp) 

Optional PDB upload for symbol resolution 

Card-based issue visualization 

Ask-AI per issue interaction 

Chatbot support 

Section-specific cancellation controls 

Automatic session restoration 

The frontend displays structured diagnostic results generated by the backend in a consistent and readable format. 

 

2.2.2 Backend Layer (Flask Application) 

The backend serves as the orchestration layer of the platform. 

Its responsibilities include: 

File handling and validation 

Pipeline selection based on file type 

Preprocessing and normalization 

AI prompt preparation 

WinDbg execution management 

JSON validation and response formatting 

Session state management 

The backend ensures modular separation between log processing, crash analysis, and cross-file correlation. 

 

2.2.3 Log Processing Engine 

The log processing engine handles: 

Plain text logs 

Structured Event Viewer exports 

Converted ETL traces 

Its workflow includes: 

Error line extraction 

Message normalization (removal of variable identifiers) 

Signature-based grouping 

Context extraction 

Active vs Resolved evaluation 

By grouping semantically identical failures, the engine reduces noise and prevents redundant AI classification. 

 

2.2.4 AI Classification Engine 

The AI engine integrates a locally deployed LLM (llama3.1:8B via Ollama) for contextual reasoning. 

It performs: 

Error type classification 

Root cause identification 

Severity assignment 

Subsystem detection 

Actionable remediation generation 

A structured prompt framework enforces JSON-based output, ensuring consistent parsing and frontend rendering. 

A stability layer validates and extracts JSON safely even when partial or malformed responses occur. 

 

2.2.5 Crash Dump Processing Engine 

The crash dump engine processes Windows .dmp files using automated WinDbg execution. 

Its responsibilities include: 

Automated !analyze -v execution 

Bug Check extraction 

Faulting module detection 

Stack trace capture 

Crash section filtering before AI processing 

Optional PDB symbol uploads allow precise function-level resolution. 

Symbol mismatch detection ensures transparency when incorrect debugging symbols are supplied. 

 

2.2.6 Cross-File Correlation Engine 

This component enables systemic failure detection across multiple uploaded files. 

It applies: 

Severity-based weighting 

Occurrence frequency analysis 

Signature correlation across files 

Dominant failure candidates are passed to the AI engine for consolidated root cause summarization with confidence estimation. 

This transforms the system from isolated file analysis to environment-level diagnostics. 

 

2.2.7 Database Layer 

The system uses SQLite for lightweight local data persistence. 

It stores: 

Chatbot history 

Ask-AI interactions 

Session restoration data 

This enables debugging continuity across refresh cycles while maintaining offline operations. 

 

2.3 Data Flow Architecture 

2.3.1 Log File Processing Flow 

User uploads log file 

Backend validates and reads file 

Error lines are extracted 

Messages are normalized 

Repetitive patterns are grouped 

Unique patterns are sent to AI engine 

Structured JSON output is validated 

Results rendered as issue cards 

 

2.3.2 Crash Dump Processing Flow 

User uploads .dmp file +PDB 

Backend invokes WinDbg 

Debug output is captured 

Relevant crash section extracted 

AI engine interprets crash details 

Structured crash summary generated 

Results displayed in UI 

 

2.4 AI Prompt Engineering Design 

The system employs a domain-controlled prompt structure to enforce structured and technically meaningful responses. 

The prompt requires: 

Failure type classification 

Subsystem identification 

Root cause reasoning 

Severity tagging 

Actionable corrective steps 

JSON output is mandatory to ensure consistent backend parsing. 

This controlled prompt framework enhances reliability and reduces generic AI responses. 

 

2.5 Performance Optimization Design 

To ensure scalability for large diagnostic files, the system incorporates: 

Error-only filtering 

Signature deduplication 

Controlled token input 

Crash output trimming 

Sequential multi-file processing 

AI call minimization 

These optimizations reduce processing time and improve system stability. 

 

2.6 Stability & Execution Control Design 

Operational reliability is ensured through: 

Timeout handling for WinDbg 

Safe subprocess execution 

Defensive JSON extraction 

Section-based cancellation controls 

Session persistence mechanisms 

These safeguards prevent system crashes during large-scale analysis. 

 

2.7 Deployment Architecture 

The platform is designed for offline Windows deployment. 

Requirements include: 

Windows OS 

Python (Flask environment) 

Ollama installed locally 

Llama3.1:8B model downloaded 

Microsoft Win Dbg installed 

No cloud services are required, ensuring data privacy and enterprise compliance. 

 

2.8 Design Advantages 

The architecture offers: 

Reduced manual debugging effort 

Pattern-level failure intelligence 

Automated crash interpretation 

Cross-file root cause detection 

Fully offline operation 

Modular extensibility 

 

Chapter 3 

Implementation Details 

3.1 Development Environment 

The system was developed in a Windows environment using Python as the primary programming language. 

The backend was implemented using the Flask web framework, while the frontend was built using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. 

Artificial intelligence integration was achieved using a locally deployed Llama3.1:8B model through Ollama. 

Crash dump analysis was automated using Microsoft Win Dbg, executed programmatically via Python subprocess calls. 

SQLite was used for lightweight local data persistence. 

 

3.2 Log Processing Implementation 

The log processing module was implemented to support plain text logs, structured Event Viewer exports, and converted ETL traces. 

3.2.1 Error Extraction 

Uploaded logs are read line-by-line. 

Only meaningful failure-related lines (e.g., containing “error”, “exception”, “failed”, “critical”) are extracted for further analysis. 

This reduces unnecessary processing and AI token usage. 

 

3.2.2 Normalization Logic 

To prevent redundant classification of similar messages, normalization is applied by: 

Removing timestamps 

Removing numeric values 

Removing memory addresses 

Removing runtime-specific identifiers 

This ensures that semantically identical errors are grouped together. 

Code snippets: 

 
def normalize(line): 

    line = re.sub(r'\d+', 'X', line) 

    line = re.sub(r'0x[0-9a-fA-F] +', 'HEX', line) 

    return line. Lower () 
 

3.2.3 Signature-Based Grouping 

A composite grouping key is generated using: 

Source + EventID + Extracted Root Signature 

Errors with the same signature are merged into a single grouped issue with an occurrence count. 

This significantly reduces duplicate AI calls. 

 

 

3.2.4 Context Extraction 

To improve AI reasoning accuracy, surrounding log lines are captured and appended to the error message before classification. 

This provides contextual awareness for root cause identification. 
 

Code snippets: 

def get_context(lines, index): 

    return " ".join(lines [index-2: index+3]) 

 

3.2.5 Active vs Resolved Detection 

Post-error log scanning is performed to determine whether a failure self-recovered. 

If recovery indicators are detected, the issue is marked as resolved; otherwise, it remains active. 
 

Code snippets: 

if "success" in next_lines: 

    status = "Resolved" 

else: 

    status = "Active" 

 

3.3 AI Integration Implementation 

3.3.1 Ollama API Integration 

The backend sends structured prompts to the locally running Ollama server via HTTP API calls. 

The request includes: 

Model name 

Prompt text 

Non-streamed response configuration 

The AI returns structured JSON responses for parsing. 

Code snippets: 

r = requests.post( 

    "http://localhost:11434/api/generate", 

    json= {"model": "llama3.1:8b", "prompt": prompt, "stream": False} 

) 

  

response = r.json() ["response"] 

 

3.3.2 Structured Prompt Framework 

Prompts were engineered to enforce: 

Error type classification 

Subsystem identification 

Root cause reasoning 

Severity tagging 

Actionable remediation 

Strict JSON formatting was mandated to ensure consistent backend parsing. 

 

3.3.3 JSON Stability Layer 

Since LLM outputs may occasionally contain additional text or formatting, a defensive extraction mechanism was implemented. 

This includes: 

Identifying JSON boundaries 

Removing markdown artifacts 

Safe parsing with fallback handling 

This prevents application crashes due to malformed responses. 

 

3.4 Crash Dump Processing Implementation 

3.4.1 WinDbg Automation 

Crash dump files are processed by invoking WinDbg through Python’s subprocess module. 

The system executes automated debugging commands to generate detailed crash analysis output. 

The output is captured into a temporary file for further processing. 

Code snippets: 

cmd = [ 

    WINDBG, 

    "-z", dump_path, 

    "-logo", "windbg_output.txt", 

    "-c", "!analyze -v; q" 

] 

  

subprocess.run(cmd, timeout=300) 

 

3.4.2 Crash Section Filtering 

To optimize AI input size, only the critical section of the WinDbg output (starting from Bug Check details) is extracted. 

This reduces token usage and improves processing speed. 
Code snippets: 

def extract_dump_section(text): 

    start = text.find("Bug Check") 

    return text [start start+6000] 

 

3.4.3 AI-Based Crash Interpretation 

Filtered crash details are passed to the AI engine, which extracts: 

Bug Check code and description 

Faulting driver/module 

Subsystem involvement 

Root cause reasoning 

Suggested corrective action 

The response is structured into JSON for frontend rendering. 

 

3.4.4 PDB Symbol Support 

The system allows optional upload of matching PDB files. 

If valid symbols are loaded: 

Function-level resolution improves crash precision. 

If mismatch is detected: 

The system notifies the user via frontend alert. 

Code snippets: 

if "symbols could not be loaded" in output.lower(): 

    mismatch_flag = True 

 

3.5 Cross-File Correlation Implementation 

When multiple files are uploaded, results are stored in a unified in-memory structure. 

A weighted scoring mechanism is applied using: 

Severity level 

Frequency of occurrence 

Cross-file signature repetition 

Top-ranked failures are sent to the AI engine to generate consolidated root cause summaries with confidence scoring. 

 

3.6 Session Persistence Implementation 

A lightweight session caching mechanism was implemented using JSON storage. 

This allows: 

Restoration of results after page refresh 

Section-wise separation of analysis results 

Prevention of cross-section duplication 

This improves usability during long debugging sessions. 

 

3.7 Cancellation Framework Implementation 

To manage long-running processes, a centralized job control flag was introduced. 

Cancellation checks are embedded within: 

Log grouping loops 

AI batch processing loops 

ETL parsing routines 

Crash dump execution steps 

Section-specific cancel controls ensure that stopping one process does not affect others. 

 

3.8 Performance Optimization Implementation 

To ensure scalability, several optimizations were implemented: 

Pattern deduplication before AI classification 

Controlled prompt size 

Crash output trimming 

Sequential multi-file processing 

Timeout enforcement for WinDbg 

These optimizations significantly reduced processing time for large diagnostic files. 

 

3.9 Security & Offline Design Considerations 

The platform operates fully offline: 

No external API calls 

No cloud dependency 

All AI processing occurs locally 

Crash dumps remain within the local environment 

This ensures enterprise compliance and data privacy. 
 

3.10 Job Folder Creation and Storage Implementation 
 

To manage multiple analysis sessions efficiently, the system implements a job-based folder creation mechanism. Each job is assigned a unique identifier using the UUID library in Python. A corresponding directory is created dynamically to store all files associated with the job. 

This folder acts as the workspace for the analysis pipeline. 

code snippet: 

import os 
import uuid 
 
job_id = str(uuid.uuid4()) 
job_folder = os.path.join("reports", job_id) 
 
if not os.path.exists(job_folder): 
    os.makedirs(job_folder) 

Once the folder is created, all generated files such as parsed logs, correlation outputs, and the final HTML report are saved inside this directory. 

This mechanism improves traceability and ensures that each analysis job remains independent. 

 

Chapter 4 

Results and Performance Analysis 

 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

The system was tested in a Windows environment with locally deployed components including Flask, Ollama (Llama3.1:8B), and Microsoft Win Dbg. 

Test inputs included: 

Small and large log files (.log, .txt) 

Structured Event Viewer exports 

ETL-converted logs 

Windows crash dump files (.dmp) 

Dumps with and without matching PDB symbols 

The objective of testing was to evaluate: 

Processing time 

Grouping efficiency 

AI classification accuracy 

Crash interpretation quality 

System stability under large workloads 

 

4.2 Log Analysis Results 

4.2.1 Duplicate Reduction Efficiency 

Before normalization and grouping, large logs contained thousands of repetitive error lines. 

After signature-based grouping: 

10,000+ raw error lines were reduced to fewer than 100 unique diagnostic patterns. 

Repetitive failures were consolidated into single issue cards with accurate occurrence counts. 

This significantly improved readability and debugging efficiency. 

 

4.2.2 Classification Quality 

The AI engine successfully generated structured outputs including: 

Error type 

Root cause 

Severity 

Corrective action 

After implementing enterprise-level prompt design: 

“Unknown” classifications were significantly reduced. 

Subsystem-level reasoning improved. 

Fix suggestions became technically actionable rather than generic. 

4.2.3 Active vs Resolved Detection Accuracy 

 

The system correctly identified whether errors self-recovered by scanning subsequent log entries. 

This prevented false alarms and provided clearer operational insight into persistent vs transient failures. 

 

4.3 Crash Dump Analysis Results 

4.3.1 Automated Bug Check Extraction 

The system successfully extracted: 

Bug Check code 

Bug Check description 

Faulting driver/module 

Stack trace references 

This eliminated the need for manual WinDbg interaction. 

 

4.3.2 AI-Based Crash Interpretation 

The AI engine interpreted crash dumps and generated: 

Root cause reasoning 

Subsystem identification 

Recommended corrective steps 

This transformed raw debugger output into structured diagnostic summaries. 

 

4.3.3 Symbol Resolution Validation 

When matching PDB files were uploaded: 

Function-level crash precision improved. 

When mismatched symbols were detected: 

The system correctly flagged the inconsistency. 

This ensures diagnostic transparency. 

 

4.4 Cross-File Root Cause Correlation 

When multiple logs or dumps were uploaded: 

Severity-weighted scoring identified dominant failure patterns. 

Recurring crash signatures were detected across files. 

Consolidated root cause summaries were generated with confidence estimation. 

This enabled systemic issue identification rather than isolated file interpretation. 

 

4.5 Performance Evaluation 

4.5.1 Log Processing Time 

File Size 

Average Processing Time 

Small (<200 KB) 

2–5 seconds 

500 KB 

~20 seconds 

1 MB 

~1 minute 

2 MB 

1–2 minutes 

Performance depends on number of unique patterns rather than total lines. 

 

4.5.2 Crash Dump Processing Time 

Scenario 

Average Time 

Single dump 

10–30 seconds 

Multiple dumps 

Sequential processing 

Processing time varies based on dump size and symbol loading. 

 

4.5.3 Performance Improvements Achieved 

Key optimizations reduced processing time significantly: 

Error-only filtering 

Signature deduplication 

Controlled AI token size 

Crash output trimming 

Timeout handling 

Earlier versions experienced long delays when processing large logs. After optimization, processing time stabilizes within predictable limits. 

 

4.6 System Stability Evaluation 

The system was tested under: 

Large file uploads 

Multiple concurrent file types 

Long-running crash analysis 

Stability improvements ensured: 

No JSON parsing crashes 

Controlled WinDbg timeouts 

Safe cancellation handling 

Proper session restoration 

The platform maintained consistent behavior during extended diagnostic sessions. 

 

4.7 Report Storage Design 

The report storage system was designed to improve scalability and maintain proper organization of analysis outputs. Each analysis of job generates a unique identifier using a UUID mechanism. This identifier is used to create a dedicated directory where all output artifacts related to that analysis are stored. 

The storage workflow is as follows: 

User uploads dump or ETL files. 

System generates a unique job ID. 

A job folder is created inside the report directory. 

All processed files and analysis outputs are stored within the job folder. 

The final HTML report is generated and saved in the same directory. 

This design ensures that previous analysis results remain accessible and prevents accidental overwriting of reports. 

 

4.8 Comparative Analysis (Before vs After Optimization) 

Feature 

Initial Version 

Optimized Version 

Duplicate Errors 

Thousands displayed 

Consolidated into grouped patterns 

AI Calls 

High redundancy 

Unique pattern only 

Crash Analysis 

Manual WinDbg required 

Fully automated 

JSON Handling 

Parsing failures possible 

Defensive stability layer 

Multi-File Analysis 

Independent results 

Cross-file correlation 

This comparison demonstrates measurable architectural improvement. 

 

4.9 Limitations 

While the system significantly enhances diagnostic automation, certain limitations remain: 

Performance depends on available hardware resources. 

AI reasoning is probabilistic and may require expert validation for critical environments. 

Real-time live system monitoring is outside the current scope. 

Extremely large crash dumps may require additional preprocessing. 

Future enhancements can further improve scalability and reasoning precision. 

Recent improvements have addressed several earlier limitations related to processing delays and unstable AI outputs. However, performance may still vary depending on hardware capabilities and the size of diagnostic inputs. Further optimization of large-scale crash dump handling remains an area for future enhancement. 

 

4.10 Summary of Results 

The developed platform successfully achieved: 

Noise reduction in large logs 

Automated crash interpretation 

Structured root cause reporting 

Cross-file failure correlation 

Stable offline execution 

The results demonstrate that AI-assisted diagnostics can significantly reduce manual debugging effort and improve efficiency in Windows-based environments. 

 

Chapter 5 

Conclusion and Future work 

 

5.1 Conclusion 

The AI-Based System Diagnostics and Analysis Platform successfully evolved from a basic log viewer into a comprehensive offline diagnostic intelligence system. The platform integrates structured log parsing, signature-based grouping, automated crash dump interpretation, and AI-driven root cause analysis within a unified architectural framework. 

By leveraging a locally deployed Large Language Model (llama3.18B via Ollama), the system enables contextual reasoning and structured classification of errors. The AI engine generates meaningful outputs including failure type, subsystem identification, severity assessment, root cause reasoning, and actionable remediation guidance. This significantly reduces the manual effort traditionally required for large-scale log and crash dump analysis. 

The integration of Microsoft WinDbg for automated crash processing further enhances the platform’s capabilities. Automated Bug Check extraction, faulty driver identification, and structured crash interpretation eliminate the need for manual debugger interaction in routine diagnostic scenarios. 

Signature-based grouping and normalization techniques effectively reduce diagnostic noise by consolidating repetitive failures into unique patterns. Cross-file correlation logic extends the system’s capability beyond isolated file analysis, enabling identification of dominant systemic issues across multiple uploads. 

Stability improvements such as JSON validation, timeout control, safe subprocess handling, and cancellation mechanisms ensure reliable operation even under large workloads. The platform operates entirely offline, ensuring enterprise data security and compliance with privacy requirements. 

Overall, the project demonstrates how artificial intelligence can augment traditional debugging workflows and transform raw diagnostic artifacts into structured, actionable insights in Windows-based environments. 

 

 

5.2 Key Contributions 

The major contributions of this project include: 

Development of a signature-based grouping mechanism to consolidate repetitive log failures. 

Integration of AI-driven classification for structured root cause detection and remediation guidance. 

Automated crash dump interpretation using WinDbg integration. 

Implementation of a defensive JSON stability layer for reliable AI output parsing. 

Introduction of cross-file root cause correlation for systemic failure identification. 

Design of a fully offline diagnostic architecture ensuring enterprise compatibility and data privacy. 

These contributions collectively enhance diagnostic efficiency, reduce manual debugging effort, and improve the clarity of failure analysis. 

 

5.3 Future Work 

Although the platform achieves significant automation in diagnostic analysis, further enhancements can expand its capabilities. 

Future improvements may include: 

Real-time log monitoring and streaming analysis 

Severity-based prioritization dashboards 

Visualization of failure trends and crash frequency patterns 

Automated report generation in PDF and Excel formats 

Enhanced AI confidence scoring mechanisms 

Advanced subsystem correlation across distributed systems 

Integration with enterprise monitoring tools and DevOps pipelines 

Additionally, hybrid deployment models combining offline intelligence with controlled cloud-based analytics may further improve scalability in large-scale enterprise environments. 

By extending these capabilities, the system can evolve into a more comprehensive predictive diagnostic assistant capable of proactive failure detection and intelligent infrastructure monitoring. 

Future enhancements will focus on incorporating real-time log monitoring capabilities, enabling proactive failure detection instead of post-event analysis. Additional improvements may include advanced visualization dashboards for error trends, integration with enterprise DevOps pipelines, and enhanced AI confidence scoring mechanisms to improve decision reliability. 

Further work may also explore hybrid deployment models combining offline intelligence with selective cloud-based analytics for improved scalability. 

 

Chapter 6 

6.1 Recent Enhancements 

The system was further enhanced after initial implementation to improve robustness, usability, and diagnostic accuracy. 

A comprehensive error handling and stability framework was introduced to prevent runtime failures during AI processing and crash dump analysis. This includes timeout handling for external tool execution, safe subprocess management, and retry mechanisms for AI inference calls. 

The backend was strengthened with structured logging to track system behavior during file processing, AI classification, and crash dump execution. This enables easier debugging and performance monitoring. 

User experience improvements were introduced in the frontend, including dynamic progress indicators, loading states, and improved error messaging to provide better transparency during long-running analysis tasks. 

The system was also optimized for improved compatibility with different diagnostic inputs by refining file validation mechanisms and ensuring consistent handling of log, ETL, and crash dump formats. 

Additionally, improvements were made to AI prompt engineering by introducing more structured outputs, reducing ambiguity in classification, and enhancing the quality of remediation suggestions. 

These enhancements significantly improved system stability, reduced failure rates during execution, and enhanced the overall reliability of the diagnostic platform. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 Lesley.thomas@hp.com